---
title: 825 C2. Good Subarrays (Hard Version)
Date: 2022-10-20
---

## Problem link

https://codeforces.com/contest/1736/problem/C2

## Problem Desciption

<details> 
This is the hard version of this problem. In this version, we have queries. Note that we do not have multiple test cases in this version. You can make hacks only if both versions of the problem are solved.

An array $b$ of length $m$ is good if for all $i$ the $i$-th element is greater than or equal to $i$. In other words, $b$ is good if and only if $b_i \geq i$ for all $i$ $(1 \leq i \leq m)$
You are given an array $a$ consisting of $n$ positive integers, and you are asked $q$ queries.
In each query, you are given two integers $p$ and $x(1 \leq p, x \leq n)$. You have to do $a_p:=x$ (assign $x$ to $\left.a_p\right)$. In the updated array, find the number of pairs of indices $(l, r)$, where $1 \leq l \leq r \leq n$, such that the array $\left[a_l, a_{l+1}, \ldots, a_r\right]$ is good.
Note that all queries are independent, which means after each query, the initial array $a$ is restored.

### Input

The first line contains a single integer $n\left(1 \leq n \leq 2 \cdot 10^5\right)$
The second line contains $n$ integers $a_1, a_2, \ldots, a_n\left(1 \leq a_i \leq n\right)$
The third line contains an integer $q\left(1 \leq q \leq 2 \cdot 10^5\right)-$ the number of queries.
Each of the next $q$ lines contains two integers $p_j$ and $x_j\left(1 \leq p_j, x_j \leq n\right)$-the description of the $j$-th query.

### Output

For each query, print the number of suitable pairs of indices after making the change.

</details>

## Solution

### solution for C1
Our index start from 1 instead of 0 in this post.

We use dynamic progromming to solve this problem. First we define our state. $dp[i]$ stand
for the number of pairs end with $i$. Now we can introduce our state transfer function. 
It should be $dp[i] = min(dp[i-1] + 1, a[i])$. 

To understand this equaion we discuss two scenario.

1. $a[i] > dp[i-1]+1$. If $a[i] > dp[i-1]+1$ that means all segment work for $i-1$ are works for $i$, amd it the segment $(i-1,i)$ also works. That is why we have $dp[i-1] + 1$
2. $a[i] < dp[i-1] + 1$. Now not all segment for $i-1$ works for $i$. Only $a[i]$ element from left works for $i$. This is because we do have $dp[i-1] + 1$, so there are more element are good segemnt for $i$. But $a[i]$ not large enough to make all them good. 

The answer for C1 is sum of $dp$ array.

### solution for C2

**Notice the test case are independent.**

Let's continue the idea from C1. But now we need to precalculate some values.

### calculate for `track[i]`

$track[i]$is define as if $dp[i] == a[i]$,

$$
track[i] = ∑_{j=i}^{n} dp[i]
$$

The track $i$ means, if $dp[i] == a[i]$ the sum of $dp$ array from $i$ to $n$. 
**notice** Here $dp[i] == a[i]$ not mean we only calcause the position where $dp[i] == a[i]$. 
We calculate for $i$ from 1 to $n$ ans supporse $dp[i] == a[i]$.

Following code can calculate $track[i]$ in time $O(n^2)$.

``` cpp
for (int i = 1; i <= n; i++) {
    track[i] = 0;
    dp[i-1] = a[i];
    for (int j=i; j <= n; j++) {
        dp[j] = min(dp[j-1], a[j]);
        track[i] += dp[j];
    }
}

```
But $O(n^2)$ method does not satisfy the constrain. Next we will develop $O(n \log n)$ method to calculate $track[i]$.

### `track[i]` in $O(n \log n)$

suppose we are calculate $track[i]$ from $n$ to $1$.

``` cpp
for (int i = n; i >= 1; i--) {
    track[i] = 0;
    dp[i-1] = a[i];
    for (int j=i; j <= n; j++) {
        dp[j] = min(dp[j-1], a[j]);
        track[i] += dp[j];
    }
}
```

We notice that when we calculate $dp[i]$, there is some point $q$, $q>p$, $dp[q] = a[q]$. After this point the array of $dp$ does not change anymore.

So when we can use following fomula to calculate $track[i]$ 

$$
track[i] = dp[i] + dp[i+1] + … + dp[q-1] + track[q]$
$$

and notice $dp[i] = a[i]$, $dp[i+1] = a[i] + 1$, and so on.

So the equation for $track[i]$ become 

$$
track[i] = (a[i] + a[i] + (q-1-i)) * (q-i) / 2 + track[q]
$$

If we know where is the $q$, we can calculate $track[i]$ in $O(n)$ time complexity.

Next we are going to explain how to find $q$

notice we have $dp[q] = a[q]$ and $a[q] < dp[i] + (q-i)$

$a[q] - q < dp[i] - i$ and notice $dp[i] - i$ is constant for every $i$. 

And we can precalculate $a[q] - q$ since it only related to $q$.

Now we can use semgent tree to find the $q$. We first query the min value in the range $(i, n)$.
If we find min value less than $dp[i] - i$ we then query $(i, (n+i)/2)$. and so on. Just use binary search to find $q$. 

up to now, we get method to calculate $track[i]$ and got the mothod to find $q$. 

Next step is we apply these method again to solve the whole problem. 


### Solution for final problem

Suppose we change $a[p]$ to $x$. First if current $dp[p]= dp[p-1] + 1$ and $x>=dp[p-1]+1$ then there is nothing change.

Other we will divide the array to three part. First part is array from $1->p-1$, in this part, nothing will be change.

We defind a $q$, $q$ is a miminum value which satisfy following conditions, $q > p$ and $dp[q] = a[q]$.

Now the second part is $p->q-1$. In this part, the $dp$ arary is $dp[p], dp[p] + 1, …$. This is easy to calculate in $O(1)$. That last part is $q->n$. The contribution of this part is $track[q]$. So now the answer can be calculate using following equation. 

$$
ans = (a[p] + a[p] + (q-1-p)) * (q-p) / 2 + track[q] + presum_dp[p-1]
$$

<details>
```cpp
```
</details>




